Here is a detailed report formatted as a README.md file, ready to be uploaded to your GitHub repository alongside your code.

ML Classification Algorithms from Scratch
This project implements three fundamental machine learning classification algorithms from scratch using NumPy:

Perceptron

Logistic Regression

Simple Neural Network (with one hidden layer)

The purpose of this project is to demonstrate a foundational understanding of these models, their internal mechanics, and their implementation without relying on high-level libraries like Scikit-learn (which is used here only for data preprocessing).

ðŸš€ Features
Object-Oriented: Each algorithm is built as a self-contained Python class (Perceptron, LogisticRegression, SimpleNeuralNetwork).

From Scratch: Core logic, including activation functions, update rules, and backpropagation, is implemented using only NumPy.

Preprocessing Included: The script includes standard data preparation steps: train-test splitting and feature scaling.

Comparative: All three models are trained and tested on the same dataset for a direct accuracy comparison.

ðŸ“‚ Project Structure
A simple file structure is expected:

your-repository-name/
â”‚
â”œâ”€â”€ data.csv            # Your dataset (MUST be named this)
â”œâ”€â”€ main.py             # Your Python script
â””â”€â”€ README.md           # This file
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
ðŸ› ï¸ Getting Started
Follow these instructions to get a copy of the project up and running on your local machine.

Prerequisites
You will need Python 3 and the following libraries:

numpy

pandas

scikit-learn

Installation
Clone the repository:

Bash

git clone https://github.com/your-username/your-repository-name.git
cd your-repository-name
Install dependencies: It's recommended to create a requirements.txt file with the following content:

numpy
pandas
scikit-learn
Then, install them using pip:

Bash

pip install -r requirements.txt
ðŸƒ Usage
To run the project, you must have your dataset in the root folder.

Add Your Data:

Place your dataset in the project's root directory.

The file must be named data.csv.

The target variable (the label you want to predict) must be in a column named Result.

Execute the Script: Run the Python script from your terminal:

Bash

python main.py
Example Output
The script will train all three models and print their final test accuracy:

Training and evaluating models...
Perceptron Test Accuracy: 89.10%
Logistic Regression Test Accuracy: 91.52%
Simple Neural Network (1 Hidden Layer) Test Accuracy: 92.44%
(Note: Your accuracy will vary based on your data.csv file and the hyperparameters.)

ðŸ”¬ Algorithm Deep Dive
This section details the implementation of each component in the script.

1. Data Preprocessing
Before any model is trained, the data goes through two crucial steps:

Train-Test Split: The data is shuffled and split into a training set (80%) and a testing set (20%). This ensures the model is evaluated on data it has never seen before.

Feature Scaling: StandardScaler (Z-score normalization) is applied. This scales all features to have a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This is critical for gradient-based algorithms (Logistic Regression and Neural Network) to converge efficiently.

2. Algorithm 1: Perceptron
Type: Linear Classifier

Activation: Heaviside Step Function (output is 0 or 1).

Training: The model is trained using the Perceptron update rule. It iterates through the dataset multiple times (n_iters). For each training sample, it makes a prediction. If the prediction is wrong, it updates the weights and bias using the formula:

update = learning_rate * (true_label - predicted_label)

weights = weights + update * input_features

bias = bias + update

3. Algorithm 2: Logistic Regression
Type: Probabilistic Linear Classifier

Activation: Sigmoid (or "Logistic") Function. This squashes the linear output to a probability between 0 and 1.


Getty Images
Training: The model is trained using Batch Gradient Descent.

For each iteration, the model calculates the predicted probabilities for the entire training set.

It calculates the gradients (derivatives) of the log-loss (binary cross-entropy) cost function with respect to the weights (dw) and bias (db).

It updates the weights and bias by taking a small step in the opposite direction of the gradient:

weights = weights - learning_rate * dw

bias = bias - learning_rate * db

4. Algorithm 3: Simple Neural Network
Type: Non-linear Classifier

Architecture: A 1-hidden-layer feedforward neural network.

Input Layer: Size n_features (number of features in the data).

Hidden Layer: Size hidden_nodes (a tunable hyperparameter).

Output Layer: Size 1 (outputs a single probability).

Activation: Uses the Sigmoid function for both the hidden layer and the output layer.

Training: The model is trained using Backpropagation.

Feedforward: The input data is passed forward through the network (Input -> Hidden -> Output) to generate a prediction.

Calculate Output Error: The error between the predicted probability and the true label is calculated.

Backpropagate Error: This error is propagated backward to calculate the "blame" or error contribution of the hidden layer.

Calculate Gradients: Gradients are calculated for the output layer weights (weights_ho) and the hidden layer weights (weights_ih).

Update Weights: All weights and biases in the network are updated using gradient descent, similar to Logistic Regression.
